# Data Science Insights 4:
## In Class Essay:

Data Science is a relatively young field that has experienced rapid growth and continues to develop. This growth means that people are constantly expanding what can be accomplished
with data science along with the ethics and other considerations that go with that. A large part of this rapid growth is due to changes in measurement across different data types. 
With spatial data the ability to use satilites and other sensors to get a measure of spatial data and land use on a finer and more representative level has opened up more granular 
analysis but also the ability of data scientists and others to consider areas that used to be even more expensive (time/money) to survey and therefore were excluded. Similarly the 
data we have on individuals of different areas is more complete and in depth in part due to technology making it more easy to connect and supplying alternative metrics that can be 
considered and then aggregated to represent a more realistic representation of a population. These advancements in collecting and estimating data opens the way for data scientists
to not only improve existing models, but to start to create new ways to model human behavior.

Agent based modeling is dependent on data and how representative, accurate, and granular it is. It is hard to get a better measure of what some agent's movement, environment, and 
actions are like if you don't have data on that same level. This is because if you don't have granular enough data, it isn't accurate to predict individuals movements or to 
generalize a model that isn't representative of the whole population to that population. If you do so without taking steps to account for that the model could make predictions that
suggest different actions that would benefit one community but leave out and hurt a whole entire other community as they were not accurately represented in the data. On the other 
hand if you go to granular, you may risk intruding on an individuals privacy. The line between privacy and representation/granularity has yet to be truly determined though measures
and industry standards have started being put into place. For instance, data collectors may have a column of data where they standardize the scale and offuscate the names and other
identifiers of the information so that data scientists can still use it to make predictions and models without being able to identify individuals.

Having historic models and data along with new models and data allows data scientists to see changes over time and generalize different patterns of the spread and actions of 
different agents. One of the best examples of agent based modeling in the present is its use to help with COVID. Specifically how it has been used to predict and understand the 
spread of COVID and thus make decisions about how to best handle resources and give advice to individuals depending on their location and risks. These types of models and data builds
off of each other as initially when modeling COVID people were basing it off of other diseases and their spread and finding correlations to help improve models with less first hand 
data. And as I mentioned earlier, when there was more accurate and realistic data, the models improved and became even better ways to figure out what actions should be taken to best
help the situation.

Data science and agent based modeling is best suited for making decisions that are related to economic and social systems due to this ability to adapt historic and current data to 
represent communities and individuals (along with diseases, etc.) and rapidly change and evolve with those agents and factors. While economic systems and social systems are 
constantly evolving, there remains trends and patterns from which the combination of historic data and present data can unearth which the human eye cannot find without the assistance
of agent based models. Agent Based modeling and Data science gives a new lens to see the world and all of the different information that exists and combines it to do complex calculations
and then simplify it again into a format that is understandable. Modeling this is powerful and can help make decisions that have the most impact. However, it is critical as people 
continue to use these models to ensure that they are representative and unbiased so that the decisions made are truly the best ones. As more standards are developed, I see more and
more government agencies and businesses using these types of modles to determine where to place stores, resources, and also locate patterns of growth across different communities to 
make decisions on a more focused basis to improve different areas with plans that are suited for their needs.
